Part I

Answer the following questions.
1. What are the relevant features of the Titanic dataset. Why are they relevant?

    The dataset have 12 features capturing information about the passangers. 
    The data is relevant to finding out about the people who survived the titanic and 
    compare them to other data in the set.


2. Can you find a parameter configuration to get a validation score greater than 62% ?

    No, we can't find a better validation score than 62.6% when we're editing the 
    parameters 'algorithm', 'max_iter' and 'n_jobs'.

3. What are the advantages/disadvantages of K-Means clustering?

    Advantages:
        - Relativly simple to implement.
        - Scales to large data sets.
    Disadvantages:
        - The biggest disadvantage is that K-Means requires you to pre-specify 
        the number of clusters (k).
        - Another  disadvantage of k-means is that it is sensitive to outliers 
        and different results can occur if you change the ordering of the data.

4. How can you address the weaknesses?
    
    1. Since we need to pre-specify the number of clusters, a good idea might 
    be to check out the data points to determine a sufficient amount of clusters.
    
    2. When using the training data, it might be good to either make sure that the 
    outliers are not as severe that it ruins our cluster.



Part II

1. How many clusters do you have? Explain your answer.

    There are 6 clusters. We have 7 colors in the dendogram plot. 
    One color is for connecting the clusters, therefore there are 6 clusters.

2. Plot the clusters to see how actually the data has been clustered.
    
    Done

3. What can you conclude by looking at the plot?

    The middle class seems to be consistent with their spending, all having a spending score of roughly 50.
    The low income do have some high spenders and also low spenders, as same for the high income.


Part III

1.  Can you choose n_components=2? Can you think of some method to test this?
    
    Yes, you can. However the size of some vectors need to be changed. By meassuring the variance ratio 
    of the principal components, we can see that those two components make up about 100% of the variance. high variance = high importance


2. Create the scatter plot of the third principal component (that is, you combine the third
principal component with the first and then the second principal component). What can
you see with the plot? What is the difference?

    As we can see in the plot, the axes have been elongated, and some points have more extreme values. 
    This makes it easier to make out certain points which are of more extreme values.


3. Can you tell which feature contribute more towards the 1st PC?
(question at page 8)
    
    It seems to be: 
    - Mean concave points
    - Mean convacity
    - Worst concave points